Let's revisit the problem
of n objects cooling down
to room temperature.
Our goal is to simulate how
these objects gradually approach
the ambient temperature using the
temperature equation shown here.
At each step, the equation
adjusts an object's temperature
based on the difference between
its current temperature and
the room temperature.
Note that each object cools
down independently.
They all follow the same rule.
But one object's temperature
doesn't affect another's.
This independence makes it a
perfect candidate for parallel
computing because we can update
every object's temperature
at the same time.
Over time, they all come
closer to the ambient
temperature of 20 degrees.
Let's see how we can implement
this simulation in C++.
We start by defining a cooling
coefficient k and setting the
ambient temperature to 20 degrees.
The temp vector holds the initial
temperatures for three objects.
We then define a lambda
function that calculates the new
temperatures based on the old ones.
Next, we apply this function
to each temperature using
STD transform, a C++ algorithm,
which updates the values in place.
By running this transformation
for several steps, each object's
temperature gradually shifts
closer to ambient.
This can be seen in the
table on the right.
Initially, at step 0, we have
temperatures we started with,
42, 24, 50 degrees.
By step 2, these temperatures
have moved toward ambient
and are now 25, 21, and 27 degrees.
Just in case you're not familiar
with std transform here's
a quick overview.
It's a standard library algorithm
that takes a range of input
elements, applies an operation
to each one, and stores the
result in a given output range.
Think of it as a conveyor belt.
Each item goes in gets
transformed and then the
output is placed somewhere.
In our case we provide the
start and the end of the
temp NVIDIA Vector.
to specify the input range.
We then specify tempBegin again
as the output, so we overwrite
the original values in place.
Finally, we pass our lambda
function, which calculates
the new temperature.
Visually, each old temperature
is fed into the operation.
42 becomes 31.
50 becomes 35.
In C++, std transform can,
alternatively, be implemented
as a simple for loop, like
the one shown here.
But let's take a step back
and see what must happen to
run this code on the CPU.
CPUs don't
inherently understand C++.
They execute machine instructions.
That's why we rely on compilers to
translate high-level C++ code into
architecture-specific instructions.
For example, on an x86 platform,
a simple C++ arithmetic
expression may be compiled
into a fused multiply add,
FMA, instruction like VFMAD.
But instruction sets
vary by architecture.
What works on an x86 CPU
won't necessarily work on
ARM, which uses its own
instruction set architecture.
GPUs are no different.
They're just another processor type
with their own set of instructions.
This means we need a specialized
compiler that can generate
GPU instructions.
This is where the NVIDIA CUDA
compiler or NVCC comes into play.
NVCC is the tool chain used to
compile CUDA C++ code targeting
both the CPU and NVIDIA GPUs.
At first glance, it might seem
like compiling CUDA code with NVCC
would result in a GPU accelerated
program, but here's the catch.
Just compiling with MVCC doesn't
mean your code runs on the GPU.
This might seem counterintuitive,
but with CUDA, compiling
the code isn't enough to
trigger GPU execution.
This apparent contradiction
highlights a key concept of
the CUDA programming model
that we haven't addressed yet.
Explicit GPU execution must be
programmed by the developer.
GPUs are accelerators rather
than standalone processors.
A lot of work like interactions
with network and file systems can
only be done on the CPU, so a CUDA
program always starts on the CPU.
You are responsible for explicitly
specifying which code has
to run on the GPU.
In other words, you are
responsible for specifying
which code runs where.
The established terminology
for where code is executed
is execution space.
At a high level, these execution
spaces are partitioned into
host, CPU, and device, GPU.
These terms are used to generalize
the programming model.
By default, code runs
on the host side.
You are responsible for
specifying which code should
run on the device.
This explains why compiling
with NVCC alone isn't enough.
We haven't explicitly designated
any code to run on the GPU.
So how do we actually run
any code on the GPU?
In C++, we often rely on libraries
rather than re-implementing
every feature from scratch.
For instance, it's likely
that you've used printf or std
sort instead of implementing them.
And CUDA is no different.
Along with NVCC, CUDA
provides a wealth of
GPU-accelerated libraries.
Some libraries are
generic, like Thrust.
which offers high-level
algorithms similar to the
C++ standard library.
There are also domain-specific
libraries such as QDNN for
deep neural networks and QBLAS
for linear algebra.
Most of these build on the
CUDA runtime, the core set
of APIs for managing and
communicating with the GPU.
Since this course is not
domain-specific, we'll focus on one
of the generic libraries, Thrust.
Let's dive in!
Thrust is a library that helps
you write GPU-accelerated programs
using tools that feel very similar
to the C++ standard library.
It simplifies working with
GPUs by offering pre-built
components for common tasks.
Thrust containers give you
GPU-friendly alternatives
To things like STD vector, the
thrust algorithms like thrust copy,
ThrustSort, et cetera, provide
GPU accelerated alternatives
to standard algorithms.
Long story short, Thrust makes it
easier to write clean, efficient
code for GPUs without worrying too
much about the low level details.
We'll start simple and explore
how Thrust can help accelerate
our cooling simulator.
On the left, you can see our CPU
version, where we use std vector
to store data and std transform
to apply the cooling operation.
On the right, we've adapted it
to GPU execution with thrust.
We replaced std vector with
thrust universal vector.
We also added the host device
specifiers to the Lambda.
And lastly, we swapped std
transform for thrust transform.
And added the
thrust device argument.
With these small changes,
our code is now set up to
run efficiently on the GPU.
Thrust keeps the style of
the C++ standard library,
making GPU acceleration much
more straightforward.
Next, let's take a closer look
at each of these adjustments,
starting with the execution
space specifiers.
As we discussed, you must
specify which hardware each
function is compiled for.
That's where execution space
specifiers come into play.
If you remember, all code is
compiled for CPUs by default.
That means that if you don't
annotate the function in any
way, there will be no instructions
for GPU to execute.
To fix that, you can annotate
the Lambda function with the
device execution space specifier.
In this case, MVCC will generate
instructions only for the GPU.
But now there are no instructions
for the CPU to execute.
If you want the function to
get compiled for both CPU
and GPU, you can add host and
device specifiers at the same time.
And that's exactly what we'll
do for the rest of this course.
Besides the execution specifiers,
we've made another change.
In the original code, we used
std transform and in the GPU
version we use thrust transform.
Aside from the difference
in the namespaces, the main
change is that we added thrust
device as the first parameter.
This parameter is called the
execution policy.
It tells thrust where to
run the algorithm.
For example,
Thrust host runs the algorithm
on the CPU behaving much
like STD transform.
Thrust device, on the other hand,
runs the algorithm on the GPU.
Thanks to this consistent
interface, you can write your
algorithm once and then decide
whether it runs on the CPU or GPU.
This eliminates the need to
maintain two separate code
paths and make switching between
CPU and GPU as easy as changing
the execution policy.
To clarify, execution policies
aren't specific to thrust.
They're a more general concept that
also influenced the introduction
of parallel algorithms in C++17.
In both thrust and C++17,
execution policies are passed as
the first argument to control how
the algorithm runs, for example,
sequentially or in parallel.
What sets thrust apart
Its execution policies also define
where the computation takes place,
whether on the CPU or the GPU.
It's important to understand the
difference between the execution
specifiers and execution policies.
So let's compare them.
When you mark a function with
an execution specifier like
host or device, you're telling the
compiler to generate instructions
for CPU, GPU, or both.
It doesn't automatically make
the function run there.
It just prepares the code
for the execution space.
So if you annotate a function
with device and call it from
a CPU, it'll just fail.
On the other hand, when you pass
an execution policy argument,
like Thrust Device or Thrust Host,
it's equivalent to saying, now run
this algorithm on the GPU or CPU.
But this does not generate any
new GPU or CPU instructions.
It simply picks which
already compiled version
should be executed.
In short, you need both pieces.
Execution space specifiers
like host, device tell the
compiler to generate the
required CPU or GPU code.
Execution policies like thrust
host or thrust device decide
where the code actually runs.
If you don't use the specifier,
there's no GPU version compiled
and if you don't use the
execution policy, there's
no instruction to run the GPU.
They work hand-in-hand to
enable GPU acceleration.
This table shows how the
specifier, host and device,
combine with the policy,
thrust host or thrust device,
to determine where code runs.
Host functions are CPU only,
so thrust fails if you try
to run them on the GPU.
Device functions are GPU only,
so thrust fails if you try
to run them on CPU.
Finally, host device functions
are compiled for both
And the policy decides whether it
actually runs on the CPU or GPU.
In addition to this notebook,
there are three exercise
notebooks in this section.
For the first exercise, you'll
check your understanding of
where your code is executed.
And this is fundamental
to harnessing the power
of accelerated computing.
In the exercise code, you'll
replace all the question marks
with either CPU or GPU.
In the second exercise, you'll
verify your understanding of
execution specifiers and policies.
For this one, you'll modify
the code so the lambda
is executed on GPU.
In this last exercise, you'll GPU
accelerate the media infection.
Good luck.